---
layout: post
title: Generating Electricity with Paramagnons
---

An international research team discovered that paramagnetic elements actually respond to heat, a breakthrough that could change the way we generate electricity.

Recently, an international team of scientists discovered a new way of generating electricity with heat. The researchers from the Ohio State University, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and North Carolina State University, innovated by working with magnetic particles called “paramagnons”. Paramagnons are small particles that “are not quite magnets, but that carry some magnetic flux”.


"Because of this discovery, we should be able to make more electrical energy out of heat than we do today… It's something that, until now, nobody thought was possible." mentioned study author Joseph Heremans, who is a professor of aerospace engineering at The Ohio State University. 


Magnets themselves don’t have any more energy than normal matter, but they can be used to control the energy currents that operate in our world. Magnetism is essentially a force, and a force that is a very potent energy adapter. It readily converts energy from one type to another. In fact, almost all of our electricity actually comes power that “uses magnetism in the conversion process”.


Almost every energy generation process relies on electron movement as the result of spin, which is where magnets regularly come in.


Traditional magnets spin when heated, which moves electrons and thus generates electricity. Essentially, conductors are placed near the magnetic field, which requires movement in order to “change”, and that is what actually moves the electrons. This movement is relative, as a spinning magnet or spinning conductor could work to generate electron motion. In terms of converting heat to electricity, it makes sense to pick the magnet since the heat spins magnets naturally. That actually “changes” the magnetic field because of the motion. But once the magnets are heated, they lose much of their magnetic power. Heating a magnet past a certain temperature, called its Néel temperature, destroys the tiny magnetic orderings of the magnet and converts it into a paramagnet. As a side note, the inverse is true as well, as magnets actually become stronger as they get colder. Once heated, the new but weakened magnetic particles are then deemed what we know as paramagnets. These paramagnets actually generate extremely small structures known as paramagnons. Scientists previously didn’t think that these particles had much use at that point. Paramagnons only exist for the tiniest fraction of a second, and are perceivable only on an atomic level. But now, paramagnons have now been discovered to propel electrons with them when they move as a result of temperature change. Even though they only exist for such a miniscule amount of time, the researchers were able to prove that it is enough time for the paramagnets to initiate what engineers call “magnon drag”. As it stands, current thermoelectric processes are not very efficient, and so are not used broadly. It is possible that this will change as a result of this discovery.


In the past, it was believed that paramagnets would have no response to heat, and thus not generate any electricity. According to this breakthrough, heated paramagnets use their paramagnons to actually move electrons a minuscule distance, but that distance that is enough for use in generation. In their discovery, the scientists used manganese telluride (MnTe) to prove this concept at high temperatures. The term used to denote this kind of electricity creation is officially known as “paramagnon drag thermopower”. It is currently unclear how effective this new method will be compared to the traditional avenues for generating electricity, but researchers are optimistic. They believe that this discovery will allow us to actually create more electron motion, and thus act as a more effective generator. 


###### References

“A New Way to Turn Heat into Useful Energy.” ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, September 23, 2019. [https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/09/190923111235.htm.](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/09/190923111235.htm)


Jensen, Sarah. “Home.” MIT Engineering, May 22, 2012. [https://engineering.mit.edu/engage/ask-an-engineer/why-cant-magnetism-be-used-as-a-source-of-energy/](https://engineering.mit.edu/engage/ask-an-engineer/why-cant-magnetism-be-used-as-a-source-of-energy/).


Peake, Tracey. “Paramagnetic Spins Take Electrons for a Ride, Produce Electricity from Heat.” NC State News, September 13, 2019. [https://news.ncsu.edu/2019/09/paramagnon-drag-thermopower/](https://news.ncsu.edu/2019/09/paramagnon-drag-thermopower/).


Zheng, Y., T. Lu, Md M. H. Polash, M. Rasoulianboroujeni, N. Liu, M. E. Manley, Y. Deng, et al. “Paramagnon Drag in High Thermoelectric Figure of Merit Li-Doped MnTe.” Science Advances. American Association for the Advancement of Science, September 1, 2019. [https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/9/eaat9461.](https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/9/eaat9461)