---
layout: post
title: 'Keyboard Cold War: How the Russian Government Threatens Our Democracy'
---

The United States does not often get what is called "a taste of its own medicine". In 1996, the International Monetary Fund feared that the incumbent and Western-friendly Boris Yeltsin was going to lose his election. President Clinton then backed a loan of ten billion dollars to help keep the drowning Russian Federation above water. At the time, there was a sentiment among Russians that the West was using its power to interrupt Russia's electoral process. Come election time, Yeltsin was able to win the presidency again, despite his approval rating dipping below ten percent during his term. Twenty years later, the game of global politics has the same players, but they play with new pieces. 

The 2016 United States presidential election is the most controversial in recent memory, mainly because of the demonstrated influence the Kremlin had over the results. This has stirred unease and anxiety in the States because election interference was never something we were on the receiving end for. Adding on to that feeling, the perpetrator is a representation of authoritarian, rigged "democracy" to many people. Regardless of our past involvement in foreign elections, our current state of unrest necessitates that we must prevent this from happening again. Russia wasn't seeking revenge, it was attacking our global influence. The forensic analysis and threat research conducted in this paper will demonstrate our shortcomings regarding all aspects of cyberdefense, but assert that our top security priority should be policy that defends us from the Kremlin's information warfare tactics.

The first step to figuring out the solution is our first question. Our analysis so far has deduced that we were primarily targeted through internet distribution of propaganda. This kind of interference made up, as far as we know, the majority of the attacks. The popular social websites that we access were the primary targets. The sheer magnitude of these attacks is unnerving. The culprits, "'...a cyberarmy'—'a legion of Russian-controlled impostors' and bots—turned the most popular social media sites into 'engines of deception and propaganda.'"(Kaplan). Unfortunately, it's clear that the Russians utilize our internet connectivity to maliciously influence our decision-making as a voting populace. The proliferation of our networks is leaving our democracy wide open. Interestingly, powerful Russians don't even seem to care about secrecy here. Vladislav Surkov, one of Putin's advisors, is on the record as having said "Foreign politicians talk about Russia's interference in elections and referendums around the world. In fact, the matter is even more serious: Russia interferes in your brains, we change your conscience, and there is nothing you can do about it"(Maza), which is an ominous quote, but it does give us a direction to head in, if we take him at his word: his statement is further evidence that our election systems integrity is not their focus. This falls in line with our understanding of how Russian "Active Measures" have operated in the past. Michael Jensen, a fellow for the Institute for Governance and Policy Analysis, describes the infiltration as "...a problem in terms of the divisive politicization of identities rather than a fake news problem in the sense of deceptive informational claims. The bulk of the communications sought to define Trump's identity and those of his opponents. This follows the identity logic historically practiced by Russian information operations…"(Jensen 122). 

At this point, it would be easy to say that we have our problem, and we can start drafting solutions. Unfortunately, it's not so simple. 

Clearly, the Russians have historically tried to infiltrate the person, rather than the machine. But now the Russians are smart enough to utilize more of a multifaceted approach to create political discord, and in our case, they are a threat to many aspects of our defense. The nature of cyberwarfare means that if the Russians were inclined to utilize more direct forms of offense, they could wreak havoc. In fact, cyberwarfare is defined by this, where "...any form of destruction is achievable through cyber means; for those with the resources, the only limitation is their own creativity"(Klimburg 37). This means that the thwarting of what many would know as traditional hacking is a necessary component of our response as well. Not only because of the possibility they might attack in this way, but because they already have demonstrated interest in doing so. During the Georgia state elections, "...the Russians had targeted county Web sites in Georgia, looking for election-related vulnerabilities"(Halpern), revealing some more heads of the Russian hydra, so to speak. We can't afford to take chances, but we can focus our efforts.

Our country is not as invincible as we would like to think, and our current approach is frustrating and confusing our allies and experts. Essentially, we have failed to adequately respond to all threats posed by the Russians. The Kremlin's mindset is very much zero-sum, according to foreign diplomacy experts, it seems "The Kremlin's political technocrats and PR consultants have realized that Western weakness is Putin's strength"(Meister 9), which is exactly why we are inadequate. Our inferior defense puts us in an extremely compromised position, and might spell disaster. To no relief, we've seen this dichotomy of offense and defense before, and it ends problematically, as "In his classic game theoretic analysis of the security dilemma in international relations, Jervis (1978) described the most dangerous situation as when it is difficult or impossible for states to distinguish between an offensive and a defensive posture among their rivals and the advantage in a conflict lies with the offense rather than the defense"(Mueller 7). The defensive measures we have taken are inadequate because we are pushing for conflict by incentivizing offense over defense. The proof lies in how our own government has responded to Trump's decisions on cybersecurity. The removal of our top official in this field has sent shockwaves through our country's leading experts. Our political leaders "have expressed their concerns... 'It's frankly mindboggling that the Trump Administration has eliminated the top White House official responsible for a whole-of-government cyber strategy, at a time when the cyber threat to our nation is greater than ever,' says Senator Mark Warner (D - Virginia), the ranking member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, in a statement"(Barrett), and it doesn't stop there: 

<blockquote>
	At a minimum, this decision and the way that it's being communicated send the wrong signal,' says J. Michael Daniel, who served as cybersecurity coordinator under President Barack Obama and currently heads up the Cyber Threat Alliance nonprofit. 'Certainly I think that our adversaries could interpret that as a signal that this administration doesn't take the issue as seriously, regardless of if that's actually their intent. - (Barrett)
</blockquote>

This is once again reinforcing the offensive advantage that the Kremlin currently has. It's obvious, many of those qualified to speak are unhappy with our direction. Regardless of the election, it seems clear that our responses in general are extremely disappointing, and our security is at risk because of it. Even factoring in the potential bias of the quoted parties, in a time where we are only getting more connected to the Internet, not prioritizing our security on that plane seems to be extremely ill-advised. Even though the primary method the Russians use is media, as it stands we are lacking in almost every regard.

For all the doom and gloom, the kind of conflict that we have with the Russians is not unfamiliar to us. At its core, this is a war of information. Similar to the Cold War before it, the conflict is over public opinion. That is why it is so important for to stop the Kremlin, because they're so effective at appealing to us, and using our democratic virtues as weak points. They correctly identified that voters are trusting and easy to trick. This means that we must prioritize responding to the information warfare, because of our extreme vulnerability to future attacks, and how much damage the Russians have already caused. Put in other words by Laura Galante, "This panorama of information that's so interesting to you gives a state, or anyone for that matter, a perfect back door into your mind"(Galante). As a public, we are currently extremely susceptible to this propaganda, and until we can adapt in some way, it will always be a problem. By nature of how easy it is to influence us, the Kremlin has extremely effective socially destructive capabilities. Specifically, "In a political operation, information warfare could involve throwing a candidate's campaign into disarray, twisting the media coverage of that candidate, or instilling distrust in the minds of voters—distrust of a certain candidate or of the entire political system"(Kaplan), meaning that Russia is threatening the entire democracy of the United States. Perceivably, we cannot afford to wait. A comparison to the Cold War is justified, because Putin is very purposefully pitting American democracy vs. Russian authoritarianism. 

Similarly, on the importance of preserving our democracy, there is a point to be made about leaving the public wide open to malicious entities. Education is the key to maintaining democracy, because an informed populace is a necessary component. Therefore, if our country is allowing the citizens to stay in ignorance or abandon reason, we might be enabling the crumbling of Western ideals. The less our country cares about reality, the worse decisions we will begin to make. One might say that a true democracy would allow misinformation, but letting fear and falsehood run rampant is antithetical to democratic ultimate purpose, the common good. Furthermore, a true democracy is not our democracy, nor an effective democracy. For this reason, complete democratic rule has been replaced by the Westernized version.

So it stands therefore that we should protect our country. Returning to our two questions, we now have to decide how to proceed. Some might argue that there's a dilemma, that heightened American defensiveness would necessarily entail greater aggression from Russia because of the acknowledgment of conflict. But as one of the world leading experts in cyberwarfare, Martin Libicki, explains, there's not a real reason to believe so. He argues: 

<blockquote>
	...does that mean that greater cybersecurity in one country will always reduce the security of another? Not directly, in most cases. To begin with, almost all defensive actions in cyberspace are unmistakably defensive: examples include measures such as diligent patch management and least privilege, multi-factor authentication, and intrusion detection systems. They cannot be used to break into systems, in large part, because such actions take place within the computer networks being defended.(Libicki 6) 
</blockquote>

With this understanding, we can see that significant increase in defense funding and research for our cyberspace would do little to stoke the flames of conflict. That is simply not how this new plane of battlefield operates. It does need to be mentioned though that while Russians might be on a complete offensive, a retaliation of equal measure in offense would be unwise. Our main problem right now is clearly deterrence, and engaging more with the Kremlin would probably be a very bad idea. Notably, "There is no evidence that pre-emptive cyberattacks will serve as effective deterrents to our adversaries in cyberspace. In fact, every time a country has initiated an unprompted cyberattack, it has invariably led to more conflict and has encouraged retaliatory breaches rather than deterring them."(Wolff), and the last thing the United States should want is a physical conflict or escalated cyber conflict with Russia. Being a revenge-minded "war-hawk" in this scenario is extremely reckless and doesn't realize the implications of going down that road.  As far as which specific defensive measures to take, it seems the most wise to enact targeted "deplatforming" measures on Russian bots, and hold social media and traditional media outlets economically accountable for continued allowance of Russian operations. This way, we can incentivize change directly. The fact of the matter is, the Russians hit us the hardest on social media. As previously mentioned, those same media companies are misguided in their current responses, and not addressing the real issues. This form of legislation would force the companies to work in the public's best interest by incentivizing prevention. Utilizing the private sector's financial power and resources as a first line of defense would seem to be effective, as their drive for profit would necessitate their compliance. Since the primary Kremlin threat, information warfare, was waged on our social media websites, an implementation of this proposed policy could mitigate the damages our country faces by intercepting the most prevalent Russian offensives before they reach the public. For the future, if we are still behind drastically, and it's not quite too late, we might have the last resort option: 

<blockquote>
	It may be time to impose some regulations on [internet speech]. Yes, there are dangers down that road, a slippery slope to the kind of political censorship that authoritarian regimes now impose on many sites and users. But those who maliciously exploit the net's laissez-faire nature are now threatening the democracy that undergirds those broader freedoms.(Kaplan) 
</blockquote>

Kaplan notes that there are vulnerabilities with our current system of speech. If times really get that bad for the United States, we might have to make that freedom of speech tradeoff. It is hard to say that we should really go that far as of now though, because the sacrifice of basic freedom for the supposed furtherment of democracy seems contradictory and antithetical to our values. But the fact of the matter is, direct measures are simply a necessity in this case, because "This much is clear: It will be far easier to shore up our technical defenses against information warfare than to fix our psychological vulnerabilities"(Zegart). These approaches will be by far the simplest ways to stop the Russians. But it doesn't mean that we should give up hope in adding other approaches. For indirect measures, our populace has adapted to new advancements in lying and misleading as they develop. Before software like Photoshop, it was obviously the case that people trusted photos more easily. Once the photo-editing software became mainstream, we became more skeptical as people with regards to incredible or unbelievable photos. As far as we can tell, adapting in a similar manner with Russian fake news as the new variable is completely possible. If we could encourage our country to view news and media with more skepticism, we might be able to cause a beneficial social change alongside the policy solutions to minimize the impact of the Kremlin's offense. Obviously this is harder to do than it is to say, but it still makes sense. 

One thing is for sure, if Washington cannot make these changes themselves, that certainly could warrant a response from our general citizenry in the form of protest and demonstration. The possible existential risk posed by Russian operations is simply too great to ignore, and it is the duty of all Americans to respond adequately in the face of an adversary. We as a country can get past this, we are simply lacking as of right now. Thus, we must call upon our representatives, and if needed, ourselves, to act. Whether our response includes the necessary changes or not is largely up to our country's citizenry. Frankly, every American has something to lose. If we want to argue in favor of advancing American values, we principally must stand up for those values when they are threatened.
