---
layout: post
title: A case study done on Google's advertising effectiveness
---

Note: This is an analysis done on case materials from Harvard Business School, not on the current state of Google necessarily.

[Here is a link to the reference material](https://hbsp.harvard.edu/tu/9cd37470 "Case Study Link")

With Google being the largest and most successful search engine on the planet, Google ads are a seemingly necessary step to any feasible marketing campaign. But before Google became a key player in the advertising industry, their innovative business model aided the company's ascent to market domination and immense profits. 

Because of Google's development on the Overture model of web advertisements, they were able to vastly improve the effectiveness of campaigns on their engine. The change to weight bids based on how Google expected them to perform was a dramatic advancement for the consumer experience because of how it changed user interaction. Since ads were being shown at a more relevant time for the users, we can reasonably infer that they were more likely to "click through", which would make the campaign more successful. The introduction of AdSense and geographic ads had a similar effect on the potency of ads listed on Google. Coupled with a lower minimum bid, and an appealing tool in Google Analytics, Google's approach had a very strong value proposition for advertisers. Definitively, these aspects of their model were some of their biggest improvements, as they would improve their coverage rates and simultaneously make each individual advertisement more efficient. 

Their monetization strategy also helped to positively impact the search experience of their users when combined with their unique engine. Because of Google's focus on ad relevance, users searched with better results and clicked on ads more. Since the ads were actually related to what the user cared about, it makes sense that it changed search strategy for the better. This system was combined with Google's Personalized Search, which ensured that users got the best results possible. This created a tangible reason to prefer Google over all other search engines, so advertisers had a steady stream of consumers, and consumers had a search engine that worked for them personally. The previously mentioned geographic ads also changed user search, because they could then receive ads that are not only specific to their search inquiries, but also to their current physical situation. 

Because of the search optimization for the user and advertiser, Google became immensely successful in their market. Users were attracted to Google's platform for the engine, and advertisers were attracted for the user base and the tools to improve their campaign effectiveness. Google created a clear value proposition for both kinds of their consumers, and their market majority meant that the revenue stream would not slow down anytime soon. Google only became more desirable to advertisers as more users flocked to their search engine, meaning that their monetization strategy would entrench many different and solid sources of capital. 

In terms of profitability, the nature of their system was naturally inexpensive. Only AdSense ads had revenue splits, and their previously mentioned amazing coverage rates, click-through rates, and cost-per-click meant that Google ads were astonishingly effective at creating profit. Outside of AdSense and paying Google employees, ads essentially cost nothing for Google to run. They had a large user-base that saw lots of relevant ads, which cost Google very little, while also having high conversion rates. For each of the four main ways that paid-listers generate revenue, Google was able to blow the standard out of the water. Since Google was charging per click on ads, they had a vested interest in the success of the campaigns. With the introduction of aforementioned Google Analytics, Google was able to increase its profits every time an advertiser did as well. Because of the numerous resources that Google provided and how the engine functioned, Google's business model would be profitable as long as capitalism propelled advertisers to make sales. 

Overall, Google was able to take the established strategy of charging per-click, and create their own version of it that satisfied consumer and advertiser needs while simultaneously benefitting off the success of the exchange it facilitated. Its low maintenance costs, extremely secure revenue streams, and appealing business model established them in their market and ensured their prosperity. Google's success depended upon the superb business skills of their leaders, and an ever-increasing demand for search engine services, that resulted in one of the most successful companies in history.
